README.md, before:

#quint

A best-practices abstraction of [node-mysql2](http://npm.im/mysql2).

[![NPM version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/quint.svg)](http://badge.fury.io/js/quint)
[![Licensed MIT](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/quint.svg)](https://github.com/ChiperSoft/quint/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)
[![Nodejs 4+](https://img.shields.io/badge/node.js-%3E=_4 LTS-brightgreen.svg)](http://nodejs.org)
[![Downloads](http://img.shields.io/npm/dm/quint.svg)](http://npmjs.org/quint)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/ChiperSoft/quint.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/ChiperSoft/quint)

## What Quint provides over using node-mysql or mysql2 Pools directly:

_Please note that the below is NOT a criticism of the excellent work put forward by [Felix Geisendörfer](https://github.com/felixge), [Doug Wilson](https://github.com/dougwilson) and [Andrey Sidorov](https://github.com/sidorares), for whom this library would not be possible without._

1. **Promises**   
   While mysql2 provides a promise wrapper of its own, it is surface level only and actually makes it harder to work with connections and pools directly. The mysql2 wrapper also does not extend its coverage to transactions, which Quint provides.

2. **Connection Bootstrapping**   
   Sometimes an application needs to be able to perform some commands against every new connection before that connection can be used for querying (eg, connection settings). While it is possible to execute queries against a connection immediately on creation, there is no assurance that those queries will fire before the query that triggered the creation of the connection. Quint always waits for bootstrap queries to finish before using a connection.

3. **Shortcut Queries**   
   If a query is only returning a single row, single column, or a single column within a single row, it can be convenient to directly query those values. Quint provides `queryRow`, `queryColumn` and `queryCell` for just such situations. `queryInsert` is also provided for when all you want back is an auto-incremented id.

4. **Connection Pinging**   
   Anyone who has used node-mysql or mysql2 in production knows the pains when the database server hangs up and the pool doesn't notice it to remove those dead connections. Quint automatically pings all idle connections in the pool every 30 seconds to ensure that no stale connections can remain around.

5. **Query Retry on Connection Failure**   
   If connection pinging fails to catch a dead connection in time, Quint will automatically retry any queries that fail due to a connection error.

6. **Usable stack traces**   
   Due to the internal structure of mysql2, stack traces produced by query errors never point at the query which caused the error. Quint replaces these unusable stack traces with a trace leading to the originating caller.

7. **Debug & Logging hooks**   
   Quint pools provide event emitter hooks for query and connection life-cycles, allowing for logging of all queries performed.

8. **Sensible Defaults**   
   Unless overridden, Quint always performs queries as prepared statements (which makes repeat queries faster) with named parameters turned on (which lets queries be easier to read and write).

## Installation

```
npm install mysql2 quint
```

The mysql2 library must be installed as a peer dependency.

## Usage

- `pool = quint(config)` - Takes a configuration object and returns a Quint pool wrapper. Note, no connection is opened until a query is performed. See below for config options.

- `mysql2Pool = pool.getPool()` - Returns the raw mysql2 Pool object used internally. If the pool has not yet been initialized by a query request, this does so.

- `pool.getConnection() => connection` - Returns a promise that resolves with an active connection *after* any bootstrap queries have completed. Note, you must call `connection.release()` once you are finished with this connection to allow it to return to the pool.

- `pool.getDisposedConnection() => connection` - Returns a [Bluebird Disposer](http://bluebirdjs.com/docs/api/disposer.html) for a connection, which automatically releases the connection after usage. See [Promise.using()](http://bluebirdjs.com/docs/api/promise.using.html) for more details.

- `pool.getRawConnection()` && `pool.getDisposedRawConnection()` - Same as above, but resolves with the mysql Connection object instead of a Quint connection.

- `pool.close() => null` - Returns a promise that resolves after all pending queries have completed and all connections in the pool have terminated.

### Transactions

- `pool.transaction([options]) => transaction` - Returns a promise that resolves with a transaction object after a connection has been retrieved and a transaction started.

- `transaction.commit([passthru]) => passthru` - Returns a promise that resolves with the provided value after the connection has committed. This releases the connection the transaction is attached to.

- `transaction.rollback([passthru]) => passthru` - Returns a promise that resolves with the provided value after the connection has rolled back. This releases the connection the transaction is attached to.

- `transaction.isActive` - Boolean property which identifies if the transaction is still open.

### Query Functions

The following functions may be called either from the pool, from a connection, or from a transaction.

- `.query(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the full results of the query operation as generated by mysql2 (an array with extra data attached).

- `.queryRow(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the first row of the results, or null if no results are returned.

- `.queryColumn(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with an array containing the first cell of every row in the results, regardless of the column's name, or an empty array.

- `.queryCell(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the first cell of the first row, or null if no results are returned.

- `.queryInsert(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the auto-increment ID generated by an `INSERT` query.

- `.queryChanged(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the number of rows changed by an `UPDATE` or `DELETE` query.

- `.queryAffected(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the number of rows affected (including rows left unchanged) by an `UPDATE` or `DELETE` query.

- `.queryStream(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a mysql2 Query object which can then be hooked into for streamed results. [See the node-mysql documentation for more details](https://github.com/mysqljs/mysql#streaming-query-rows). Note: Streamed queries ignore the `prepared` option and always execute as plain queries.

All query functions may receive 2-3 arguments with an SQL string, array or object of query parameters, and an optional options object. The options object may contain any non-connection related configuration options (such as `prepared` and `retry`) to override pool-level settings. Alternatively you may also pass a single argument, an options object with the `sql` and `values` properties, like so:

```js
pool.query({
	sql: 'SELECT * FROM users LIMIT :limit',
	values: { limit: 10 },
	retry: false
})
```

### Events

The Quint pool emits several query life-cycle events.

* `query-start` (method, query): Fires when a query is invoked.
* `query-retry` (err, method, query, duration): Fires at the start of a query retry due to a fatal error
* `query-success` (method, query, duration): Fires when a query finishes successfully
* `query-error` (err, method, query, duration): Fires when a query fails, after exhausting retries.
* `query-done` (err, method, query, duration): Fires when a query finishes, regardless of success or failure (err will be null if success).
* `connection` (connection): Fires when the mysql2 opens a new connection, before bootstrapping.
* `connection-ready` (connection): Fires after bootstrapping has finished.
* `connection-ping-out` (err): Fires when a connection is removed from the pool by the ping operation.

## Example Recommended Usage

Create a module that represents your database:

```js
// mysql.js
var quint = require('quint');
var config = require('your/config/library');
var log = require('your/logging/library');

var mysql = quint(config.mysql);
mysql.on('query-complete', (type, query, duration) => {
	log.debug(query, `${type} query completed in ${duration}ms`);
});
mysql.on('query-error', (err, type, query, duration) => {
	log.error({ err, query }, `${type} query failed after ${duration}ms`);
});

module.exports = mysql;
```

```js
// user.js
var mysql = require('./mysql');

exports.getById = (userid) => mysql.queryRow('SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = :userid', { userid });
```

```js
// user.spec.js
var assert = require('assert');
var sinon = require('sinon');
var proxyquire = require('proxyquire').noCallThru();
var StubMysql = {}
var User = proxyquire('./user', {
	'./mysql': StubMysql
});

define('getById', () => {
	beforeEach(() => {
		StubMysql.queryRow = sinon.stub()
	})

	it('should return a user record', () => {
		var userRecord = { id: 5 };
		StubMysql.queryRow.withArgs(5).returns(Promise.resolve(userRecord));

		return User.getById(5).then((result) => {
			assert.equal(result, userRecord);
		});
	});
});
```

## Config Options

The options object takes all of the same [connection](https://github.com/felixge/node-mysql#connection-options) and
[pool](https://github.com/felixge/node-mysql#pool-options) options from node-mysql and node-mysql2. Some of these are included
below for the sake of easier reference.

**Connection Options:**

* `host`: The hostname of the database you are connecting to. (Default: `localhost`)
* `port`: The port number to connect to. (Default: `3306`)
* `user`: The MySQL user to authenticate as.
* `password`: The password of that MySQL user.
* `database`: Name of the database to use for this connection (Optional).
* `connectionLimit`: The maximum number of connections to create at once. (Default: `10`)
* `charset`: The charset for the connection. This is called "collation" in the SQL-level
  of MySQL (like `utf8_general_ci`). If a SQL-level charset is specified (like `utf8mb4`)
  then the default collation for that charset is used. (Default: `'UTF8_GENERAL_CI'`)
* `timezone`: The timezone used to store local dates. (Default: `'local'`)
* `connectionBootstrap`: An array of queries to perform, in order, when a new connection is created. May be either strings or
  objects, as described above for single argument queries. (Default: `null`)
* `ping`: Options for connection pinging. Set to false to disable pings entirely.
* `ping.frequency`: Ping interval (Default: 30000)
* `ping.query`: Query to perform each ping. (Default: `'SELECT 1+1 as two;'`)
* `ping.expectedResult`: Expected return from the query. If return does not match, the connection is closed. (Default: `[ { two: 2 } ]`)

**Query Options:**

* [`namedPlaceholders`](https://github.com/sidorares/node-mysql2/blob/master/documentation/Extras.md#named-placeholders):
  If true, queries will be parsed for named parameters. (Default: `true`)
* `prepared`: Boolean value to control if queries should be executed as prepared statements using mysql2's `execute()` function.
  Prepared statements send the query text to the server separately from the parameter data, caching the query to avoid parsing
  time on subsequent calls of the same query.
* `retry`: Should a query should be retried on connection failure. Forced to false for queries made on connection or transaction
  objects. (Default: `true`)
* `retryCount`: How many times a query should be retried after a failure. (Default: `2`)
* `tidyStacks`: Boolean value to control if errors should have their call stack corrected to point at originating code (there is a very minuscule performance cost). (Default: `true`),
* `transactionAutoRollback`: If a query error occurs during a transaction, automatically rollback the transaction. (Default: `true`)

Commit message:

Changing the name of the library to mysequel

README.md, after:

#mysequel

A best-practices abstraction of [node-mysql2](http://npm.im/mysql2).

[![NPM version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/mysequel.svg)](http://badge.fury.io/js/mysequel)
[![Licensed MIT](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/mysequel.svg)](https://github.com/ChiperSoft/mysequel/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)
[![Nodejs 4+](https://img.shields.io/badge/node.js-%3E=_4 LTS-brightgreen.svg)](http://nodejs.org)
[![Downloads](http://img.shields.io/npm/dm/mysequel.svg)](http://npmjs.org/mysequel)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/ChiperSoft/mysequel.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/ChiperSoft/mysequel)

## What MySequel provides over using node-mysql or mysql2 Pools directly:

_Please note that the below is NOT a criticism of the excellent work put forward by [Felix Geisendörfer](https://github.com/felixge), [Doug Wilson](https://github.com/dougwilson) and [Andrey Sidorov](https://github.com/sidorares), for whom this library would not be possible without._

1. **Promises**   
   While mysql2 provides a promise wrapper of its own, it is surface level only and actually makes it harder to work with connections and pools directly. The mysql2 wrapper also does not extend its coverage to transactions, which MySequel provides.

2. **Connection Bootstrapping**   
   Sometimes an application needs to be able to perform some commands against every new connection before that connection can be used for querying (eg, connection settings). While it is possible to execute queries against a connection immediately on creation, there is no assurance that those queries will fire before the query that triggered the creation of the connection. MySequel always waits for bootstrap queries to finish before using a connection.

3. **Shortcut Queries**   
   If a query is only returning a single row, single column, or a single column within a single row, it can be convenient to directly query those values. MySequel provides `queryRow`, `queryColumn` and `queryCell` for just such situations. `queryInsert` is also provided for when all you want back is an auto-incremented id.

4. **Connection Pinging**   
   Anyone who has used node-mysql or mysql2 in production knows the pains when the database server hangs up and the pool doesn't notice it to remove those dead connections. MySequel automatically pings all idle connections in the pool every 30 seconds to ensure that no stale connections can remain around.

5. **Query Retry on Connection Failure**   
   If connection pinging fails to catch a dead connection in time, MySequel will automatically retry any queries that fail due to a connection error.

6. **Usable stack traces**   
   Due to the internal structure of mysql2, stack traces produced by query errors never point at the query which caused the error. MySequel replaces these unusable stack traces with a trace leading to the originating caller.

7. **Debug & Logging hooks**   
   MySequel pools provide event emitter hooks for query and connection life-cycles, allowing for logging of all queries performed.

8. **Sensible Defaults**   
   Unless overridden, MySequel always performs queries as prepared statements (which makes repeat queries faster) with named parameters turned on (which lets queries be easier to read and write).

## Installation

```
npm install mysql2 mysequel
```

The mysql2 library must be installed as a peer dependency.

## Usage

- `pool = mysequel(config)` - Takes a configuration object and returns a MySequel pool wrapper. Note, no connection is opened until a query is performed. See below for config options.

- `mysql2Pool = pool.getPool()` - Returns the raw mysql2 Pool object used internally. If the pool has not yet been initialized by a query request, this does so.

- `pool.getConnection() => connection` - Returns a promise that resolves with an active connection *after* any bootstrap queries have completed. Note, you must call `connection.release()` once you are finished with this connection to allow it to return to the pool.

- `pool.getDisposedConnection() => connection` - Returns a [Bluebird Disposer](http://bluebirdjs.com/docs/api/disposer.html) for a connection, which automatically releases the connection after usage. See [Promise.using()](http://bluebirdjs.com/docs/api/promise.using.html) for more details.

- `pool.getRawConnection()` && `pool.getDisposedRawConnection()` - Same as above, but resolves with the mysql Connection object instead of a MySequel connection.

- `pool.close() => null` - Returns a promise that resolves after all pending queries have completed and all connections in the pool have terminated.

### Transactions

- `pool.transaction([options]) => transaction` - Returns a promise that resolves with a transaction object after a connection has been retrieved and a transaction started.

- `transaction.commit([passthru]) => passthru` - Returns a promise that resolves with the provided value after the connection has committed. This releases the connection the transaction is attached to.

- `transaction.rollback([passthru]) => passthru` - Returns a promise that resolves with the provided value after the connection has rolled back. This releases the connection the transaction is attached to.

- `transaction.isActive` - Boolean property which identifies if the transaction is still open.

### Query Functions

The following functions may be called either from the pool, from a connection, or from a transaction.

- `.query(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the full results of the query operation as generated by mysql2 (an array with extra data attached).

- `.queryRow(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the first row of the results, or null if no results are returned.

- `.queryColumn(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with an array containing the first cell of every row in the results, regardless of the column's name, or an empty array.

- `.queryCell(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the first cell of the first row, or null if no results are returned.

- `.queryInsert(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the auto-increment ID generated by an `INSERT` query.

- `.queryChanged(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the number of rows changed by an `UPDATE` or `DELETE` query.

- `.queryAffected(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a promise which resolves with the number of rows affected (including rows left unchanged) by an `UPDATE` or `DELETE` query.

- `.queryStream(sql, [values], [options])` - Returns a mysql2 Query object which can then be hooked into for streamed results. [See the node-mysql documentation for more details](https://github.com/mysqljs/mysql#streaming-query-rows). Note: Streamed queries ignore the `prepared` option and always execute as plain queries.

All query functions may receive 2-3 arguments with an SQL string, array or object of query parameters, and an optional options object. The options object may contain any non-connection related configuration options (such as `prepared` and `retry`) to override pool-level settings. Alternatively you may also pass a single argument, an options object with the `sql` and `values` properties, like so:

```js
pool.query({
	sql: 'SELECT * FROM users LIMIT :limit',
	values: { limit: 10 },
	retry: false
})
```

### Events

The MySequel pool emits several query life-cycle events.

* `query-start` (method, query): Fires when a query is invoked.
* `query-retry` (err, method, query, duration): Fires at the start of a query retry due to a fatal error
* `query-success` (method, query, duration): Fires when a query finishes successfully
* `query-error` (err, method, query, duration): Fires when a query fails, after exhausting retries.
* `query-done` (err, method, query, duration): Fires when a query finishes, regardless of success or failure (err will be null if success).
* `connection` (connection): Fires when the mysql2 opens a new connection, before bootstrapping.
* `connection-ready` (connection): Fires after bootstrapping has finished.
* `connection-ping-out` (err): Fires when a connection is removed from the pool by the ping operation.

## Example Recommended Usage

Create a module that represents your database:

```js
// mysql.js
var mysequel = require('mysequel');
var config = require('your/config/library');
var log = require('your/logging/library');

var mysql = mysequel(config.mysql);
mysql.on('query-complete', (type, query, duration) => {
	log.debug(query, `${type} query completed in ${duration}ms`);
});
mysql.on('query-error', (err, type, query, duration) => {
	log.error({ err, query }, `${type} query failed after ${duration}ms`);
});

module.exports = mysql;
```

```js
// user.js
var mysql = require('./mysql');

exports.getById = (userid) => mysql.queryRow('SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = :userid', { userid });
```

```js
// user.spec.js
var assert = require('assert');
var sinon = require('sinon');
var proxyquire = require('proxyquire').noCallThru();
var StubMysql = {}
var User = proxyquire('./user', {
	'./mysql': StubMysql
});

define('getById', () => {
	beforeEach(() => {
		StubMysql.queryRow = sinon.stub()
	})

	it('should return a user record', () => {
		var userRecord = { id: 5 };
		StubMysql.queryRow.withArgs(5).returns(Promise.resolve(userRecord));

		return User.getById(5).then((result) => {
			assert.equal(result, userRecord);
		});
	});
});
```

## Config Options

The options object takes all of the same [connection](https://github.com/felixge/node-mysql#connection-options) and
[pool](https://github.com/felixge/node-mysql#pool-options) options from node-mysql and node-mysql2. Some of these are included
below for the sake of easier reference.

**Connection Options:**

* `host`: The hostname of the database you are connecting to. (Default: `localhost`)
* `port`: The port number to connect to. (Default: `3306`)
* `user`: The MySQL user to authenticate as.
* `password`: The password of that MySQL user.
* `database`: Name of the database to use for this connection (Optional).
* `connectionLimit`: The maximum number of connections to create at once. (Default: `10`)
* `charset`: The charset for the connection. This is called "collation" in the SQL-level
  of MySQL (like `utf8_general_ci`). If a SQL-level charset is specified (like `utf8mb4`)
  then the default collation for that charset is used. (Default: `'UTF8_GENERAL_CI'`)
* `timezone`: The timezone used to store local dates. (Default: `'local'`)
* `connectionBootstrap`: An array of queries to perform, in order, when a new connection is created. May be either strings or
  objects, as described above for single argument queries. (Default: `null`)
* `ping`: Options for connection pinging. Set to false to disable pings entirely.
* `ping.frequency`: Ping interval (Default: 30000)
* `ping.query`: Query to perform each ping. (Default: `'SELECT 1+1 as two;'`)
* `ping.expectedResult`: Expected return from the query. If return does not match, the connection is closed. (Default: `[ { two: 2 } ]`)

**Query Options:**

* [`namedPlaceholders`](https://github.com/sidorares/node-mysql2/blob/master/documentation/Extras.md#named-placeholders):
  If true, queries will be parsed for named parameters. (Default: `true`)
* `prepared`: Boolean value to control if queries should be executed as prepared statements using mysql2's `execute()` function.
  Prepared statements send the query text to the server separately from the parameter data, caching the query to avoid parsing
  time on subsequent calls of the same query.
* `retry`: Should a query should be retried on connection failure. Forced to false for queries made on connection or transaction
  objects. (Default: `true`)
* `retryCount`: How many times a query should be retried after a failure. (Default: `2`)
* `tidyStacks`: Boolean value to control if errors should have their call stack corrected to point at originating code (there is a very minuscule performance cost). (Default: `true`),
* `transactionAutoRollback`: If a query error occurs during a transaction, automatically rollback the transaction. (Default: `true`)
